FR #1094: Add Dataset Completeness attribute for custom columns (#1800)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: supporting_content/attributes/scenario_completeness.md

## When to Include Custom Columns

Data generators SHOULD include custom columns in the following scenarios:

1. **Provider-Specific Attributes:** When native datasets contain attributes not represented in FOCUS columns (e.g., Azure Resource Group, GCP project hierarchy, AWS account organizational units).

2. **Marketplace Metadata:** When charges include marketplace or publisher information needed for attribution or analysis (e.g., marketplace product identifiers, seller information).

3. **Service-Specific Configuration:** When provider services include configuration details needed for optimization or cost attribution (e.g., capacity types, instance families, storage classes).

4. **Correlation Identifiers:** When native datasets include identifiers that enable reliable correlation between FOCUS and native datasets (e.g., native charge identifiers, line item IDs).

## When NOT to Include Custom Columns

Data generators MUST NOT include custom columns in the following scenarios:

1. **Duplication:** When information is already captured in FOCUS standard columns. Custom columns MUST NOT duplicate data already represented in FOCUS columns.

> 2. **Transformed Data:** When native data is transformed or aggregated into FOCUS columns, data generators MUST NOT add custom columns for the original native representation. The transformation should be documented, but the original format should not be duplicated.

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Resolved**

The uppercase RFC 2119 keywords have been changed to lowercase in the supporting content. The linter automatically corrected these, and the current text now uses lowercase "should not" for guidance.

3. **Violates Data Integrity:** When including custom columns would violate FOCUS metrics integrity (e.g., would break cost summation or quantity aggregation).

## Correlation Guidance

To enable reliable correlation between FOCUS and native datasets:

* **Providers with existing unique identifiers:** Include them as custom columns (e.g., `x_ChargeId`, `x_LineItemId`).
* **Providers without existing identifiers:** Document correlation guidance and include minimal custom columns required for dataset joins.
* **Correlation columns serve as linking mechanisms:** Uniqueness within FOCUS datasets is not required, as correlation is typically done at the dataset level.

## Aggregation and Splitting Examples

> When rows are split or aggregated to conform to FOCUS requirements (e.g., Discount Handling), custom column values MUST be handled consistently:

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Resolved**

Rephrased to use lowercase "must" as suggested. The current text now reads: "Custom column values must be handled consistently when rows are split or aggregated to conform to other FOCUS requirements."

**Solution:** The attribute includes a MAY requirement allowing data generators to preserve non-FOCUS versions of custom columns even after FOCUS equivalents are introduced. This enables migration on practitioners' own terms without breaking changes, addressing AWS's column stability policy.

### GCP "Junk Drawer" Concern

**Concern:** Requiring providers to include all native dataset information as custom columns could cause FOCUS to become a "junk drawer" - accumulating unnecessary, low-quality, or unfocused data.

**Solution:** Since FOCUS only asks providers to include data they already have in their native datasets, data quality depends on provider data quality, not FOCUS requirements. Providers maintain control over what they include and can curate their data appropriately. The MAY requirement allowing exclusion of columns that don't support scenarios enables providers to avoid including low-value data, ensuring quality standards are preserved.

## When to Include Custom Columns

> Data generators SHOULD include custom columns in the following scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom columns SHOULD be included in the following scenarios:
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Partially implemented**

Adopted entity-focused language ("Custom columns should be included" instead of "Data generators SHOULD include"). Kept keywords lowercase because this is supporting content (non-normative). RFC 2119 keywords (uppercase SHOULD/MUST) are reserved for normative requirements in the specification.

1. **Provider-Specific Attributes:** When native datasets contain attributes not represented in FOCUS columns (e.g., Azure Resource Group, GCP project hierarchy, AWS account organizational units).

2. **Marketplace Metadata:** When charges include marketplace or publisher information needed for attribution or analysis (e.g., marketplace product identifiers, seller information).

3. **Service-Specific Configuration:** When provider services include configuration details needed for optimization or cost attribution (e.g., capacity types, instance families, storage classes).

4. **Correlation Identifiers:** When native datasets include identifiers that enable reliable correlation between FOCUS and native datasets (e.g., native charge identifiers, line item IDs).

## When NOT to Include Custom Columns

> Data generators should avoid including custom columns in the following scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom columns should be avoided in the following scenarios:
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Implemented**

Adopted entity-focused language ("Custom columns should be avoided" instead of "Data generators should avoid including custom columns").

2. **Transformed Data:** When native data is transformed or aggregated into FOCUS columns, data generators should generally not add custom columns for the original native representation. The transformation should be documented instead. However, data generators MAY preserve non-FOCUS versions of columns when FOCUS equivalents are introduced to enable migration without breaking changes.

3. **Violates Data Integrity:** When including custom columns would violate FOCUS metrics integrity (e.g., would break cost summation or quantity aggregation).

## Correlation Guidance

To enable reliable correlation between FOCUS and native datasets:

* **Providers with existing unique identifiers:** Include them as custom columns (e.g., `x_ChargeId`, `x_LineItemId`).
* **Providers without existing identifiers:** Document correlation guidance and include minimal custom columns required for dataset joins.
* **Correlation columns serve as linking mechanisms:** Uniqueness within FOCUS datasets is not required, as correlation is typically done at the dataset level.

## Aggregation and Splitting Examples

> When rows are split or aggregated to conform to FOCUS requirements (e.g., Discount Handling), custom column values MUST be handled consistently:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom column values MUST be handled consistently when rows are split or aggregated to conform to FOCUS requirements (e.g., Discount Handling):
```

Author: 🤖 [AI][Claude] ✅ **Partially implemented**

Adopted entity-focused language ("Custom column values must be handled consistently" instead of "Data generators must handle custom column values consistently"). Kept keywords lowercase because this is supporting content (non-normative). The normative requirement is ScenarioCompleteness-A-008-M in the specification.
